# Wi-Fi-Wand-Capstone-Project
My final group capstone project was an Arduino-based device that could analyze the signal strength of nearby Wi-Fi networks in various ways. I was in charge of the software behind the project, which can be seen within this repository.

Our device consists of a Wio Terminal, made by Seeed Studio, with a Grove GPS module attached to one of the serial ports of the device. The Wio Terminal runs off of an ATSAMD51 processor, uses a Realtek RTL8720DN for on-board Wi-Fi and Bluetooth capabilities, has an on-board LCD display, and an included microSD card slot, all of which are used within the project. 

The Wi-Fi Wand has five main functions: A normal Wi-Fi scan, a mode for identifying GPS coordinates, a mode to chart signal strength activities, a simple heat map builder, and a mode that logs recorded data onto a microSD card. Some modes, like the GPS coordinate mode, were created specifically for testing before those functions were incorporated into later modes.

The Wi-Fi scanning mode will search for nearby networks and list them all out onto the LCD screen, in order from greatest signal strength to lowest. Along with the name of each network, the device will also display the current signal strength measurement in dBm, along with a non-linear conversion that represents the signal strength as a percentage to allow for a simpler understanding of how strong the signal is. This mode will update at the rate that it takes the wireless processor to complete a network scan until the user exits the mode.

The GPS coordinate mode simply signaled for the GPS module to update the GPS coordinates, and would read back the modules recordings. It would then display the longitude and latitude coordinates onto the screen, constantly updating as the module was moved around.

The signal strength chart mode would first display all of the nearby networks, allowing the user to choose which network they wish to analyze. The device would then chart the network's signal strength in dBm, and would record a new reading onto the chart with each network scan. The signal strength over time chart would store each new reading until 30 measurements were recorded, at which case it will delete the least recent measurement from the chart to make room for the newest.

The simple heat map mode is intended to be used to generate a heat map of the network in a small to medium sized room. The device first displays all nearby networks for the user to choose, and then instructs the user to stand in one corner of the room at which they would like to generate the heat map. Once in the corner, the user is instructed to press the 'record' button, and then move to the three remaining corners, pressing 'record' at each corner before continuing. Whenever the user records a corner's measurements, the device stores the network's signal strength in dBm along with the GPS coordinates for that corner. Once all four corners have been recorded, the device uses the GPS coordinates to figure out which corner is which (that way the order at which the user chooses to record the corners does not change the resulting heat map) and then simply plugs the four RSS values into an algorithm that was made to form a heat map of networks. The algorithm used was originally intended to be used with four existing Wi-Fi processors stationed at each corner, but was modified to allow our device to generate similar heat maps with only one Wi-Fi chip.

Finally, the SD card data logger mode, similar to the chart and heat map modes, instructs the user to choose the intended Wi-Fi network to analyze. The device then asks the user to input the number of data scans they would like to be saved. Once these options have been chosen, the device runs through each scan recording the network name, signal strength, the date and time, and the longitude and latitude coordinates onto the inserted microSD card in the format of a CSV file. Each value is also displayed onto the screen with each recording. This mode was created with the intention of being able to access the device's readings on an external device and manipulate the data however the user intends.

The end goal of this project was to be able to generate heat maps of any Wi-Fi network in range. This was technically accomplished with the simple heat map mode, but the team originally intended to build a large grid that records each pixel as an individual RSS reading of the network, converted into a color scale. The device would have used the GPS coordinates to figure out which pixel (or set of pixels) would be set to which color as the user walked around with the device. Unfortunately because of the limited time given to work on the project within the Capstone class, we ultimately decided to take a simpler approach. That being said, I would love to continue to work on this project to reach the intended functionality.
